---
layout: post
title: "Creating a MUD"
date: 2022-01-30
author: Matt Jordan
---

_West Seattle. It was raining._

# In Which We Set Out To Do A Thing

I think I first became conceptually aware of MUDs in late high school. It's possible that I didn't really come across it though until my freshmen year of college, but I have vague recollections of trying to mine ore over telnet in some esoteric MUD on my dad's Gateway in our basement, which feels more like senior year of high school. So circa 1999 - 2001.

Exact year aside, the first MUD I became heavily involved in was [JediMUD](https://muds.fandom.com/wiki/JediMUD). It was admittedly a pretty weird MUD, with a mix of Star Wars and Fantasy. There was no theme or story: in one area you'd be fighting the Ring Bearer to steal the One Ring, in the next you'd be in a Greek myth setting fighting, in the next you'd be on a train in a post-apocalyptic take of the Old West. But it was _fun_, and I spent a lot of time between classes mashing a loud mechanical keyboard, feet propped up on my loft. It was my gateway to D&D, and Everquest, and all sorts of other great roleplaying games - both virtual and in-person.

Like most folks in Computer Science and/or Engineering, I found myself wanting to make my own D&D style game. While I spent a bunch of time daydreaming about it, it never turned into reality. To be fair, I was a pretty bad programmer in those days, and both starting something huge from scratch or contributing to an existing codebase was somewhat beyond me. Besides a few aborted attempts in my undergraduate days that mostly involved trying to get some variant of Diku to compile, it never really went very far.

But I still really, really wanted to make one.

# But the fourth one, it stayed up

My first serious attempt was sometime in 2007 or 2008. I had, by this time, managed to learn enough about programming to be doing it professionally, and I decided to fulfill that dream by writing a MUD in C#. It went pretty well until I had to start saving the state of the game, at which point I discovered how little I knew about dealing with databases or persistence of any kind. I also wasn't very good at starting with a blank sheet of paper and making incremental progress, so my game was very, very deep in certain places (tons of character classes with object inheritance for days) but weak on actually _working_. So I gave up on it.

The second serious attempt was in 2015. Around this time on a whim I had started playing [Aardwolf](https://www.aardwolf.com/), which is a fabulous game. Aardwolf and its wonderful MUSHClient really made playing a largely text based adventure game so much more enjoyable, and I had once again gotten the bug to try my hand at making my own game. After taking some inspiration from Evennia, I started a new one in Python. Unfortunately, this one also petered out, largely for the same reason as the C# one. While my game state could be persisted, it was extremely cumbersome, with a lot of manual translation between a MySQL instance and the in-memory objects. Fundamentally, however, I still had a problem in how I was trying to write the game. My overall approach would be to start building something extremely detailed in one area of the game, only to discover that a mechanic that was fundamental to having the game actually work was lacking. This would lead to a massive refactoring, and everything would fall apart.)

The third attempt started in 2018 in Javascript, but picked up steam in 2020 with the onset of the pandemic. By this time, I had a much better grasp on where I was making mistakes, and started with a much more straight forward approach of getting _something_ working end-to-end before tossing in a ton of complexity. At least, for the most part. I had a notion of having items have material properties ala Dwarf Fortress, but I quickly backed out of that once it became unteneble. But for the most part, I was on a _roll_, until two things happened. First, I discovered that - once again - how I was trying to maintain object state was biting me all over the place. Unlike past attempts that periodically saved the state of the game to a database - MongoDB this time - I was using MongoDB as the authoritative state of the game. This worked great for reliability, but caused a lot of weird update race conditions as timers in the game and messages from websockets would both try to update objects. Keeping it all straight was becoming a nightmare. On top of that, I started a refactoring to ES6, which became a ridiculous re-write of a lot of the classes. Sometime in late 2020, I threw in the towel on this attempt as well.

Enter: [the fourth attempt](https://youtu.be/aNaXdLWt17A?t=21). Which is, of course, the current one.

This is actually _mostly_ a port of the third attempt, albeit with a clear separation between the MongoDB models and the in-game state. While that seems like I'm repeating the errors in the first two MUDs, this _should_ be the right approach. It's certainly got better performance, and the abstraction that Mongoose provides along with some fairly straight forward `load` / `save` methods on some classes keeps it pretty sane. What it does pull over is a lot of the plumbing that the third MUD had gotten right: a system for publishing messages and routing them to various participants based on their location, transport association, and some more.

The third MUD attempt explicitly didn't have a frontend yet. This time I've kicked that off in parallel, going all in on React. Normally I'd say that's a bad idea: React can be massively complicated and a pain to wrap your head around. I haven't touched it professionally since 2018 as well, so my knowledge four years later is rusty. However, taking a look at the options, I was pleasently surprised to see that React has gotten simpler with the introduction of hooks. This project isn't going to be so complicated that it warrants the inclusion of something like Redux, and I was able to bang out a fairly simple UI quickly.

Finally, this blog.

Taking a page from [Ron Jeffries entertaining series of posts on his Dungeon game](https://ronjeffries.com/categories/dungeon/), I figured I'd write a bit as I go. This won't be comprehensive, but I've found that writing things out when trying to build something helps to clarify _why_ I'm doing something.

So. Let's make a MUD!

# Reference Links

* The backend: [mjmud-backend](https://github.com/matt-jordan/mud-backend)

* The frontend: [mjmud-frontend](https://github.com/matt-jordan/mud-frontend)

